README.md, before:

# 📌 Overview
This project explores the architecture, training, and inference of large language models from scratch using PyTorch. It also revisits the LSTM architecture from the pre-transformer era to provide historical and performance-based comparison.

The following model types are implemented and analyzed:

* Encoder-only Transformers (e.g., BERT-style)

* Decoder-only Transformers (e.g., GPT-style)

* Full Seq2Seq Transformers (e.g., for machine translation)

* Baseline RNN model using LSTM

# 📚 Datasets Used
All datasets used in this project are stored in the `data/` folder.
To evaluate and compare various model architectures, the following datasets were employed:

1. Tiny Shakespeare
    - Size: ~1MB of text.
    - Use Case: Useful for quick experimentation with character-level generation due to its small size and stylistic consistency.
    - Applied in: Encoder-only, decoder-only, and LSTM models.

2. Alice in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll
    - Size: ~150KB of text.
    - Use Case: Classic English literature offering structured narrative text, used for experimenting with character-level and word-level tokenizations owing o its small vocabulary size.
    - Applied in: Encoder-only, decoder-only, and LSTM models.

3. IWSLT2017 (EN↔DE Translation)
    - Size: ~40MB of ~200K sentence pairs.
    - Type: Parallel English-German corpus
    - Use Case: Designed for benchmarking machine translation models.
    - Applied in: Seq2Seq Transformer with shared Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE) tokenizer.

# 🧩 Tokenization Strategies
Tokenization plays a crucial role in how language models process and understand text. This project experiments with multiple tokenization schemes to analyze their effect on model performance and generalization.

1. Character-Level Tokenizer
    - Type: Custom, from-scratch implementation -> `utils/ch_tokenizer.py`.
    - Vocabulary: All unique characters from the dataset.
    - Pros: Simple to implement and captures fine-grained detail.
    - Cons: Longer sequences and lower convergence due to sparse signal.

2. Word-Level Tokenizer (Custom)
    - Type: Custom tokenizer splitting on whitespace and punctuation -> `utils/word_tokeinizer.py`
    - Vocabulary: Built manually from training corpus.
    - Pros: More semantic understanding than character-level and faster convergence.
    - Cons: Vocabulary explosion with rare or compound words and poor generalization to unseen words.

3. Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE)
    - Type: Subword-level tokenizer using HuggingFace's tokenizers library.
    - Shared Vocabulary: Trained on combined English-German corpus from IWSLT2017.
    - Training script `scripts/train_tokenizer_seq2seq.py`.
    - Trained tokenizer `tokenizers/seq2seq_shared_tokenizer.json`.
    - Pros: Handles rare words and morphology gracefully, vocabulary size can be tuned and suitable for multilingual tasks.
    - Cons: Slightly more complex setup.

# 📦 Dataset Classes
Custom PyTorch `Dataset` classes were implemented to efficiently handle training samples for different model-tokenizer combinations.

1. `TextDataset` – for Character/Word Tokenizers
    - Used with: Character-level and word-level tokenizers.
    - Purpose: Prepares fixed-length input (x) and target (y) sequences for next-token prediction.
    - Mechanism: For each sample, `x = tokens[i : i+seq_len], y = tokens[i+1 : i+1+seq_len]`
    - Output: (x, y) as integer token sequences.

2. `Seq2SeqDataset` – for BPE-based Translation
    - Used with: BPE tokenizer (`seq2seq_shared_tokenizer.json`)
    - Purpose: Prepares padded input-output sentence pairs for Seq2Seq translation tasks.
    - Mechanism: Tokenizes and pads both `src` and `tgt` sequences and generatesencoder input, decoder input with `[BOS]` and decoder target (right shifted).
    - Output: Dictionary with `src`, `tgt`, and `label` tensors.

Document:

  training for loss curves, overfitting, plateauing etc. Experiment with the hyperparameters.
  
  inference, how the generated text compares with the other models. Generalization capability.
  
Visualize the results

Finally build a mini transformer based language model

In Progress

Commit message:

Updated Readme with LSTM observations

README.md, after:

# 📌 Overview
This project explores the architecture, training, and inference of large language models from scratch using PyTorch. It also revisits the LSTM architecture from the pre-transformer era to provide historical and performance-based comparison.

The following model types are implemented and analyzed:

* Encoder-only Transformers (e.g., BERT-style)

* Decoder-only Transformers (e.g., GPT-style)

* Full Seq2Seq Transformers (e.g., for machine translation)

* Baseline RNN model using LSTM

# 📚 Datasets Used
All datasets used in this project are stored in the `data/` folder.
To evaluate and compare various model architectures, the following datasets were employed:

1. Tiny Shakespeare
    - Size: ~1MB of text.
    - Use Case: Useful for quick experimentation with character-level generation due to its small size and stylistic consistency.
    - Applied in: Encoder-only, decoder-only, and LSTM models.

2. Alice in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll
    - Size: ~150KB of text.
    - Use Case: Classic English literature offering structured narrative text, used for experimenting with character-level and word-level tokenizations owing o its small vocabulary size.
    - Applied in: Encoder-only, decoder-only, and LSTM models.

3. IWSLT2017 (EN↔DE Translation)
    - Size: ~40MB of ~200K sentence pairs.
    - Type: Parallel English-German corpus
    - Use Case: Designed for benchmarking machine translation models.
    - Applied in: Seq2Seq Transformer with shared Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE) tokenizer.

# 🧩 Tokenization Strategies
Tokenization plays a crucial role in how language models process and understand text. This project experiments with multiple tokenization schemes to analyze their effect on model performance and generalization.

1. Character-Level Tokenizer
    - Type: Custom, from-scratch implementation -> `utils/ch_tokenizer.py`.
    - Vocabulary: All unique characters from the dataset.
    - Pros: Simple to implement and captures fine-grained detail.
    - Cons: Longer sequences and lower convergence due to sparse signal.

2. Word-Level Tokenizer (Custom)
    - Type: Custom tokenizer splitting on whitespace and punctuation -> `utils/word_tokeinizer.py`
    - Vocabulary: Built manually from training corpus.
    - Pros: More semantic understanding than character-level and faster convergence.
    - Cons: Vocabulary explosion with rare or compound words and poor generalization to unseen words.

3. Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE)
    - Type: Subword-level tokenizer using HuggingFace's tokenizers library.
    - Shared Vocabulary: Trained on combined English-German corpus from IWSLT2017.
    - Training script `scripts/train_tokenizer_seq2seq.py`.
    - Trained tokenizer `tokenizers/seq2seq_shared_tokenizer.json`.
    - Pros: Handles rare words and morphology gracefully, vocabulary size can be tuned and suitable for multilingual tasks.
    - Cons: Slightly more complex setup.

# 📦 Dataset Classes
Custom PyTorch `Dataset` classes were implemented to efficiently handle training samples for different model-tokenizer combinations.

1. `TextDataset` – for Character/Word Tokenizers
    - Used with: Character-level and word-level tokenizers.
    - Purpose: Prepares fixed-length input (x) and target (y) sequences for next-token prediction.
    - Mechanism: For each sample, `x = tokens[i : i+seq_len], y = tokens[i+1 : i+1+seq_len]`
    - Output: (x, y) as integer token sequences.

2. `Seq2SeqDataset` – for BPE-based Translation
    - Used with: BPE tokenizer (`seq2seq_shared_tokenizer.json`)
    - Purpose: Prepares padded input-output sentence pairs for Seq2Seq translation tasks.
    - Mechanism: Tokenizes and pads both `src` and `tgt` sequences and generatesencoder input, decoder input with `[BOS]` and decoder target (right shifted).
    - Output: Dictionary with `src`, `tgt`, and `label` tensors.

# 🧠 LSTM Model (Pre-Transformer Baseline)
The baseline recurrent architecture is implemented in `models/lstm/rnn_LSTM.py`, with training handled via `train_lstm.py` and configurations specified in `config_lstm.py`. Inference or generation from trained checkpoints can be tested using the `generator/lstm_generator.py` script.

Initial experiments were conducted using the Alice in Wonderland dataset with a character-level tokenizer. Without any learning rate scheduling or regularization, signs of overfitting began as early as the first or second epoch. Particularly, when seed prompts were taken directly from the dataset, the generated outputs reproduced the training text almost verbatim. Even when the seed was a random phrase, the generation quickly collapsed into sequences memorized from the dataset, highlighting a severe lack of generalization.

To mitigate this, a lower learning rate and a cosine annealing scheduler were introduced. With this adjusted configuration, the training and validation losses began to diverge only after 7–8 epochs, showing a more realistic training pattern before overfitting set in. A sample loss curve is included in the notebook and visualized below:

The same LSTM model was also tested with a word-level tokenizer trained on the same dataset. Although it showed faster convergence, the generalization issues remained, particularly when the vocabulary was large or rarely occurring tokens were frequent.

<p align="center">
  <img src="assets/lstm_loss_curves.png" alt="LSTM Loss Curve" width="500"/>
</p>



Document:

  training for loss curves, overfitting, plateauing etc. Experiment with the hyperparameters.
  
  inference, how the generated text compares with the other models. Generalization capability.
  
Visualize the results

Finally build a mini transformer based language model

In Progress
